<style>pre code {border: none; background-color: none; padding: 0;} pre, code {border: 1px solid #ddd; background-color: #eee;} pre {padding: 1em;} h1, h2, h3, h4, h5, h6{font-family: Helvetica, Arial, sans-serif;} body {margin: 3em 6em 3em 6em;}</style>

## Bismark Simulcast: Parallelized firmware installation
Stephen Woodrow<br />
<srwoodrow@gmail.com>

### Overview

To achieve scale of deployment with reasonable efficiency, it is necessary to
install and update the firmware of many Bismark gateways in parallel. However,
this is not simply a matter of connecting a number of devices to a switch. Each
gateway's LAN is addressed with the same range and supplies DHCP addresses.
Further, the firmware must be installed either though HTTP (in the case of the
factory Netgear firmware) or SCP and SSH (in the case of the
Bismark/{cero,open,uber}WRT firmware).

Bismark Simulcast overcomes these challenges by connecting each device to a
802.1Q VLAN-capable switch in order to isolate the devices and allow each
device to be accessed in spite of their overlapping IP address ranges. These
VLANs are demultiplexed on a specially-configured virtual machine configured
with iptables to handle routing to each VLAN interface, and processes to manage
the firmare upgrade and configuration of each device.


### 1. Configuring the switch

The general idea is to configure all but on of the ports on the ethernet switch
as a separate VLAN, to achieve isolation between the devices. Each of these
VLANs is then trunked out of the switch on a trunking port, which is connected
to the virtual machine and demultiplexed accordingly.

#### Example configuration for Pronto

The following instructions will configure a 48-port gigabit ethernet Pronto
XorPlus-based switch for installing/updating the firmware of 47 Bismark
gateways in parallel.

1. Connect a machine to ETH1 (management-ethernet eth0) port on the front of
the 48-port Pronto switch.

    **Note that the switch is not configured with security in mind; do not
    connect it to the Internet.**

2. Set the IP address of the ethernet interface connected to the switch to
192.168.1.2 with a subnet mask suitable for the 192.168.1.0/24 network
(255.255.255.0).

3. Copy the configuration file to the switch with the following shell command:

        scp switch_config/pronto/pica_48port_trunkedvlans.conf root@192.168.1.1:/cf_card/CONFIG/pica_startup.boot

    The password, when requested, is `pica8`.

4. Restart the switch.

When the switch comes back up, it will now be configured to tag native ethernet
frames with VLAN tags on ports 1-47. The VLAN tags are calculated to be (100 +
switch port number), so ethernet frames transmitted to port 23 would be tagged
with VLAN 123. Ports 1-47 can be connected to LAN ports (not the WAN port) on
WNDR3700 routers for firmware upgrading/installation.

Port 48 is a VLAN trunking port for VLAN tags 101-147, and must be connected to
the machine that will be controlling and directing the firmware installation
effort.

### 2. Configuring the virtual machine

    MAKE SURE HOST OS DOESN'T HAVE ANY VIRTUAL INTERFACES ON THE WIRED ETHERNET
    CONNECTED TO SWITCH -- THIS WILL STRIP VLAN-TAGGED FRAMES INTENDED FOR THE
    VM

#### Installation Procedure for Ubuntu Server

##### Virtualbox settings
- name: bismark-simulcast-ubuntu
- configuration: Linux/Ubuntu
- base memory: 512MB
- HD: dynamically expanding, 8GB
- network:
    - adapter 1 (eth0):
        - paravirtualized
        - NAT
    - adapter 2 (eth1):
        - paravirtualized
        - host-only; name: vboxnet0
    - adapter 3 (eth2):
        - paravirtualized
        - bridged to eth0

##### OS installation
- image: ubuntu-11.04-server-i386.iso
- eth0 is primary network interface
- hostname: bismark-simulcast
- partition entire disk as guided, no LVM
- user: bismark/bismark
- no disk encryption
- apply security updates automatically
- openssh server
- install GRUB in MBR

##### OS post-install configuration
- edit /etc/network/interfaces to contain the following:

        auto eth0
        iface eth0 inet dhcp

        auto eth1
        iface eth1 inet dhcp

- install packages:
    - vlan
    - fping

##### Copy/"install" upgrade software
    ssh bismark@192.168.56.101 mkdir /home/bismark/bin
    scp bin/*.py /bin/config_vlans.sh bismark@192.168.56.101:~/bin/

##### Configure the OS networking stack
- edit the config params near the top of config\_vlans.sh
- run `sudo config_vlans.sh` (this is why you want to use a VM)
- if you make an error or need to reconfigure, just repeat the above

##### Testing configuration

Run the following command: `watch -n 2 "fping -t 50 -r 1 -g 192.168.2.0/26 2>
/dev/null"`.

You should observe live-ness from the IP addresses corresponding to ports on
the switch with routers connected:

    Every 2.0s: fping -t 50 -r 1 -g 192.168.2.0/26 2> /dev/null

    192.168.2.2 is alive
    192.168.2.12 is alive
    192.168.2.0 is unreachable
    192.168.2.1 is unreachable
    ...


### 3. Running the upgrader

#### wndr3700v2\_factory\_upgrade.py

`wndr3700v2_factory_upgrade.py` is the tool that actually does the HTTP-based
firmware upgrade on a Netgear router with the factory firmware. One instance of
this program will flash one router. It is invoked as follows:

    wndr3700v2_factory_upgrade.py PATH_TO_FIRMWARE_FILE FACTORY_IP_ADDRESS FLASHED_IP_ADDRESS

The arguments are as follows:

- PATH\_TO\_FIRMWARE\_FILE: the path to the factory (non-sysupgrade) file to be
  flashed on the router
- FACTORY\_IP\_ADDRESS: the IP address of the router to flash. In the case of
  the WNDR3700v2, it will be `192.168.1.<switch_port_number>`
- FLASHED\_IP\_ADDRESS: the IP address of the router after it is flashed and
  restarted. In the case of Bismark, this will probably be
  `192.168.42.<switch_port_number>`

_Note that the factory and flashed IP addresses are dependent on you
configuring the vlan interfaces and routing table properly using the
config\_vlans.sh script_

##### Example invocation

An example invocation for Bismark might be the following (for the device on
switch port 9):

    wndr3700v2_factory_upgrade.py openwrt-ar71xx-generic-wndr3700v2-jffs2-factory-NA.img 192.168.1.9 192.168.42.9

This assumes that the LAN subnet for the factory firmware is 192.168.1.0/24 and
the LAN subnet for the Bismark firmware is 192.168.42.0/24, again configured in
config\_vlans.sh.
